React router update (#8)
learn-co-curriculum/react-hooks-react-router-programmatic-navigation: README.md

## Learning Goals

> - Understand the use cases for programmatic navigation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Explain the use cases for programmatic navigation
```

browser URL, and show the user a new page in our application, **without** making
the user click on a link.

We've included some files for you to code along in as we walk through the

> examples below. The files already have routing set up - we just need to update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
examples below. The files already have routing set up — we just need to update
```

> them to include programmitic navigation!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
them to include programmatic navigation!
```

> ## The useNavigate Hook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The `useNavigate` Hook
```

To enable programmatic navigation, we can use another custom hook from React

> Router: the `useNavigate` hook. Here's how we could include it in our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Router: the `useNavigate` hook. Using it in our
```

> application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application is pretty straightforward:
```

> First, we need to import it into the component in which we want to use it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- First, we import it into the component in which we want to use it;
```

> `import { useNavigate } from 'react-router-dom'`. In this case, we'll be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in this case, we'll be
```

importing into our `App` component.

> Then, we need to invoke our `useNavigate` hook and save the returned function in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, we need to invoke our `useNavigate` hook and save the returned function in
```

> a variable. Let's call that variable `navigate` for simplicity: `const navigate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a variable.
```

Author: I'm fine with removing the "Let's call that variable `navigate` etc." portion, but is there a reason we want to get rid of the `const navigate = useNavigate()` portion? I included that and the other short code examples here because the full example down below is a little busy. 

I thought it might be easier for students to pick out the key pieces of functionality being demonstrated if they had some very simple examples to look at first. What do you think?

Author: I do see that you've added comments to the examples, which I think is a great addition, but I think having both could be helpful for students.

Reviewer: The reason I did that is because when I was reading it, the amount of detail made me think I was supposed to be making the updates to my code at that point. I also wanted to add comments to the code block because it was always frustrating to me as a student when there was a big code block that I'd have to comb through it to find the changes, so I figured a quick bulleted list of the general steps followed by the commented code was a good middle ground. 

Having said that, though, I've never really found a good way to handle this situation and I'm not married to this approach. I'm fine with adding more details to the bulleted steps as long as it's reasonably clear that they don't need to be implementing them yet.

Author: I think the comments are a great addition! I would like to leave in the small code examples for the time being, if that's okay. 

I will tweak the language a bit to be a little more specific, as I think that could help, although I don't personally think it's necessary to include any explicit "don't implement this yet" language, as our longer example immediately follows these bullet points and shows students the correct implementation.

Author: Ok, language tweaked! Let me know if you think that looks ok or if we should continue editing.

> = useNavigate()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Any particular reason we want to remove this part? (See earlier comment.)

> Now, whenever we want to use programmatic navigation, we'll simply pass the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Then, whenever we want to use programmatic navigation, we'll simply pass the
```

> route we want to navigate our user to as an argument to the `navigate` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
route we want to navigate our user to as an argument to the `navigate` function.
```

> `navigate("/")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Any reason in particular we want to remove this example? (See earlier comment.)

Let's update our `App` component to include some programmatic navigation logic,
as well as some state management logic that mocks user authentication:

```jsx
// App.js
import { useState, useEffect } from "react";

> import { Outlet, useNavigate} from "react-router-dom";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Add useNavigate to import
import { Outlet, useNavigate} from "react-router-dom";
```

> import Navbar from "./components/Navbar";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import NavBar from "./components/NavBar";
```

function App() {

>   const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Add code to mock user authentication
    const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);
```

>   const navigate = useNavigate()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const navigate = useNavigate();
```

  const login = () =>{

>     setIsLoggedIn(true)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    setIsLoggedIn(true);
```

  }

  const logout = () =>{

>     setIsLoggedIn(false)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    setIsLoggedIn(false);
```

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
```

>   useEffect(() =>{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Add programmatic navigation for login and logout
    useEffect(() =>{
```

    if (isLoggedIn) {

>       navigate("/")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      navigate("/");
```

    } else {

>       navigate("/login")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      navigate("/login");
```

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    };
```

>   }, [isLoggedIn])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }, [isLoggedIn]);
```

  return (
    <div className="app">

>       <Navbar logout={logout} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <NavBar logout={logout} />
```

>       <Outlet context={login}/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Pass login function to Outlet as context
    <Outlet context={login}/>
```

    </div>
  );

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
};
```

export default App;
```

>**Note:** We placed our call to `navigate` within our `useEffect` because we
>want to navigate our user _after_ they've successfully logged in or out. By
>placing the state that dictates whether or not a user is logged in or out
>within the dependency array of our `useEffect`, we can programmatically
>navigate our user whenever a change in state occurs. This approach means we
>only call `navigate` once our state has updated. You don't always have to put
>`navigate` inside of a `useEffect`, but it makes sense to do so in this case.

Now, we can update our `NavBar` component to handle user logout functionality.

```jsx
// NavBar.js
import { NavLink} from "react-router-dom";

> 

Reviewer: import "./NavBar.css";

> function Navbar({ logout }) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function NavBar({ logout }) {
```

  return (
    <nav>
      <NavLink
        to="/"
        className="nav-link" 
      >
        Home
      </NavLink>
      <NavLink
        to="/about"
        className="nav-link"
      >
        About

>       </NavLink>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      </NavLink>
      // Add the logout function to handle the onClick event
```

      <button onClick={logout}>Logout</button>
    </nav>
  );
};

> export default Navbar;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export default NavBar;
```

```

And we can update our `Login` component to handle user login.

```jsx

> // Login.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Login.js
import { useState } from "react";
```

import { useOutletContext } from "react-router-dom";

> function Login() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function Login() {
  // Access the login function passed as context
```

function App() {
  const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);
  const navigate = useNavigate();

  const login = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(true);
  }

  const logout = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(false);
  };

  useEffect(() =>{
    if (isLoggedIn) {
      navigate("/");
    } else {
      navigate("/login");
    };
  }, [isLoggedIn]);

  return (
    <div className="app">
      <NavBar logout={logout} />
      <Outlet context={login}/>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

>**Note:** We placed our call to `navigate` within our `useEffect` because we
>want to navigate our user _after_ they've successfully logged in or out. By
>placing the state that dictates whether or not a user is logged in or out
>within the dependency array of our `useEffect`, we can programmatically
>navigate our user whenever a change in state occurs. This approach means we
>only call `navigate` once our state has updated. You don't always have to put
>`navigate` inside of a `useEffect`, but it makes sense to do so in this case.

Now, we can update our `NavBar` component to handle user logout functionality.

```jsx
// NavBar.js
import { NavLink} from "react-router-dom";

> 

Author: ```suggestion
import "./NavBar.css"
```

    };
  }, [isLoggedIn]);

  return (
    <div className="app">
      <NavBar logout={logout} />
        { /*Pass login function to Outlet as context */}
      <Outlet context={login}/>
    </div>
  );
};

export default App;
```

>**Note:** We placed our call to `navigate` within our `useEffect` because we
>want to navigate our user _after_ they've successfully logged in or out. By
>placing the state that dictates whether or not a user is logged in or out
>within the dependency array of our `useEffect`, we can programmatically
>navigate our user whenever a change in state occurs. This approach means we
>only call `navigate` once our state has updated. You don't always have to put
>`navigate` inside of a `useEffect`, but it makes sense to do so in this case.

Now, we can update our `NavBar` component to handle user logout functionality.

```jsx
// NavBar.js
import { NavLink} from "react-router-dom";
import "./NavBar.css"
function NavBar({ logout }) {

  return (
    <nav>
      <NavLink
        to="/"
        className="nav-link" 
      >
        Home
      </NavLink>
      <NavLink
        to="/about"
        className="nav-link"
      >
        About
      </NavLink>

>       // Add the logout function to handle the onClick event

Reviewer 2: Use JSX comment syntax:

```jsx
{/* Add the logout function to handle the onClick event */}
```

>       // Add the logout function to handle the onClick event

Author: ```suggestion
      {/* Add the logout function to handle the onClick event */}
```

    });

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
```

>   function handleLogin(e) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Create a function that calls the login function when the form is submitted
  function handleLogin(e) {
```

    e.preventDefault();
    login();

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
```

      ...formData,
      [e.target.name]: e.target.value,
    });
  };

  // Create a function that calls the login function when the form is submitted
  function handleLogin(e) {
    e.preventDefault();
    login();
  };

  return (

>     <form onSubmit={handleLogin}>

Reviewer 2: Add the `<label>` tag to both inputs:

```jsx
<form onSubmit={handleLogin}>
  <label for="username">Username</label>
  <div>
    <input
      id="username"
      type="text"
      name="username"
      value={formData.username}
      onChange={handleChange}
    />
  </div>
  <label for="password">Password</label>
  <div>
    <input
      id="password"
      type="password"
      name="password"
      value={formData.password}
      onChange={handleChange}
    />      
  </div>
  <button type="submit">Login</button>
</form>
```

Author: Edited!

        value={formData.password}
        onChange={handleChange}
      />
      <input type="submit">Login</input>
    </form>
  );
};

export default Login;
```

## The Navigate Component

In addition to the `useNavigate` hook, React Router also provides a special
component for redirecting users to a new location: the `Navigate` component.

To use the `Navigate` component, we simply invoke it the same way we would
invoke any other component, then pass it a `to` prop that points toward a route
endpoint: `<Navigate to="/login" />`.

This component is particularly useful in cases where you need to handle some
conditional rendering. For example, in the App component below, instead of
rendering our `NavBar` component we can render a `Navigate` component that will
navigate to the `/login` endpoint if the user is not logged in:

```jsx
// App.js
import { useState, useEffect} from "react";
import { Outlet, Navigate, useNavigate} from "react-router-dom";

> import Navbar from "./components/Navbar";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import NavBar from "./components/NavBar";
```

function App() {

>   const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);
  const navigate = useNavigate();

```

   const login = () =>{

>     setIsLoggedIn(true)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    setIsLoggedIn(true);
```

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
```

  const logout = () =>{

>     setIsLoggedIn(false)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    setIsLoggedIn(false);
```

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
```

  useEffect(() =>{
    if (isLoggedIn) {
      navigate("/")
    } else {
      navigate("/login")
    }
  }, [isLoggedIn])

  return (

>     <div className="app">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <div className="app">
    // Add conditional rendering so users have to be logged in to see pages on the site
```

>       {isLoggedIn ? <Navbar logout={logout}  /> : <Navigate to="/login" />}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      {isLoggedIn ? <NavBar logout={logout}  /> : <Navigate to="/login" />}
```

      <Outlet context={login}/>
    </div>
  );

> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
};
```

      />
      <input type="submit">Login</input>
    </form>
  );
};

export default Login;
```

## The Navigate Component

In addition to the `useNavigate` hook, React Router also provides a special
component for redirecting users to a new location: the `Navigate` component.

To use the `Navigate` component, we simply invoke it the same way we would
invoke any other component, then pass it a `to` prop that points toward a route
endpoint: `<Navigate to="/login" />`.

This component is particularly useful in cases where you need to handle some
conditional rendering. For example, in the App component below, instead of
rendering our `NavBar` component we can render a `Navigate` component that will
navigate to the `/login` endpoint if the user is not logged in:

```jsx
// App.js
import { useState, useEffect} from "react";
import { Outlet, Navigate, useNavigate} from "react-router-dom";
import NavBar from "./components/NavBar";

function App() {
  const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);
  const navigate = useNavigate();

   const login = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(true);
  };

  const logout = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(false);
  };

  useEffect(() =>{
    if (isLoggedIn) {

>       navigate("/")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      navigate("/");
```

    } else {

>       navigate("/login")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      navigate("/login");
```

    }

>   }, [isLoggedIn])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }, [isLoggedIn]);
```

In addition to the `useNavigate` hook, React Router also provides a special
component for redirecting users to a new location: the `Navigate` component.

To use the `Navigate` component, we simply invoke it the same way we would
invoke any other component, then pass it a `to` prop that points toward a route
endpoint: `<Navigate to="/login" />`.

This component is particularly useful in cases where you need to handle some
conditional rendering. For example, in the App component below, instead of
rendering our `NavBar` component we can render a `Navigate` component that will
navigate to the `/login` endpoint if the user is not logged in:

```jsx
// App.js
import { useState, useEffect} from "react";
import { Outlet, Navigate, useNavigate} from "react-router-dom";
import NavBar from "./components/NavBar";

function App() {
  const [isLoggedIn, setIsLoggedIn] = useState(false);
  const navigate = useNavigate();

   const login = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(true);
  };

  const logout = () =>{
    setIsLoggedIn(false);
  };

  useEffect(() =>{
    if (isLoggedIn) {
      navigate("/");
    } else {
      navigate("/login");
    }
  }, [isLoggedIn]);

  return (
    <div className="app">

>     // Add conditional rendering so users have to be logged in to see pages on the site

Reviewer 2: Use JSX comment syntax:
```jsx
{/* Add conditional rendering so users have to be logged in to see pages on the site */}
```

>     // Add conditional rendering so users have to be logged in to see pages on the site

Author: ```suggestion
{/* Add conditional rendering so users have to be logged in to see pages on the site */}
```
